Now, just a few quick words and some of the important parameters of 3D medical images,
which are really unique to specifically a 3D datasets.
So one important concept is the orientation of the 3D medical images.
So in DICOM you have this notion of
reference coordinate system which is the coordinate system,
which is associated with the patient and there is the scanner coordinate system,
which is associated with the stationary scanner.
Sometimes, the images are not perfectly aligned against the scanner coordinate system.
So in the DICOM format,
there are two values that will hint at what is
the orientation of the image with respect to the scanner coordinate system.
They are called the image position patients.
So this value tells you where exactly the image is
positioned and image orientation patients.
So this value stores the two vectors that gives
you the orientation of the image with respect to a scanner.
Again, note that there is nothing in
DICOM format that will tell you which plane is axial,
which is coronal, which is sagittal.
So typically, you infer this information from
either series description or prior knowledge and this two values,
image position patient and image orientation per patient,
are the closest thing to having this information about
the exact planar configuration of the image that you are dealing with.
These two parameters are the most common ones.
There are some other parameters which are less prevalent
and if you really want to understand how your image is oriented,
you will have to dig through the DICOM standard unfortunately.
But one trick, one useful trick to keep in mind when you are trying to figure out
what's the orientation is just load the image into a tool like 3D slicer,
which we've just have looked and makes sure that the orientation that you are seeing
there is the orientation that you would expect when you're processing your dataset.
So to recap, there are two important data elements in the DICOM format which
define the map between
the scanner coordinate system and
the reference coordinate system associated with the patient.
These two data elements are image orientation patient and image position patient.
The IOP defines the two vectors that tell you how the image is oriented in space and
the IPP image position patient defines
the points in 3D space which are the coordinates of the image.
Now, let's look at how the Pixel Spacing
information and resolution information is stored in the DICOM files.
One other important parameter of the DICOM files,
one other data element that you might want to read and analyze this called Pixel Spacing.
As I have already hinted,
DICOM pixels in DICOM files,
they do not have to be square.
So it is not uncommon to have a DICOM file where pixels in the x-dimension will be
smaller than in the y-dimension and
the pixel spacing is the data element that stores this information.
When you go into 3D and when you think about how tall are your pixel,
so how big are they in the z-dimension,
you would be looking at the data element called Slice Thickness.
So basically you have multiple slices and
Slice Thickness defines the distance between those slices.
It is very common to see Slice Thickness which is different from Pixel Spacing.
But at the same time, Pixel Spacing would be the same across x and y dimension.
So pixels would have rectangular shapes.
One other important thing to remember is
the Slice Thickness is one of those DICOM elements that do not have to be there.
So it could be that you will not have a Slice Thickness elements.
Some other things to look at in that case would be the image position patients elements,
which we just talked about.
So image position patient element defines the three coordinates which
defines where exactly in space the image is
located and you would be looking maybe at the less coordinate,
the z-axis, the z location of the slice to define what is
the Slice Thickness that you are dealing with
and sometimes you have an element called Slice Location,
which can also help you understand how thick are your slices.
So in a quick word, when it comes to NIFTI files,
some of the important detail elements in the NIFTI files
are also orientation data elements,
similar to the DICOM,
IOP and IPP fields,
NIFTI file stores these matrices,
the srow and qoffset,
vectors, which define the orientation of the image.
NIFTI files also define the pixdim field and pixdim field
stores the pixel dimensions in the three-dimensional space.
NIFTI file formats defined using units of
measurements as I have mentioned and the field called
xyzt _units is the field that she would read to
understand what are the units of measurements used in the NIFTI files.
Lastly, so far when we were talking about the important parameters,
we have talked about parameters that define the spatial aspects of pixel in the 3D space,
another important set of parameters in DICOM and NIFTI files are the parameters that
define the photometric aspects of pixels in the color space.
They define what are the different values,
what are the brightness's mean and how they map to the digital representation.
A key component of that are the data elements that has to do with bit depth.
So we have seen how the values in DICOM file can range from minus 3,000 to plus 3,000,
we've talked about Hounsfield units.
DICOM files actually tell you how many bits
are used to store the color information about one pixel,
the grayscale range information about
one pixels and these are the values that you will be looking at.
You will be looking at things like bits allocated,
bit stored in maybe high bit which will define whether you're
dealing with a little endian or big endian data-type.
So we have looked at some of the important parameters of the DICOM and NIFTI files.
Again, this may seem like a little bit overwhelming right now.
We will keep coming back to this concept as we will do exercises and we'll go through
further lectures and right now to help you internalize a little bit of this knowledge,
let me walk you through an examples of
exploratory data analysis of
3D medical imaging data sets and let's jump into a Jupyter Notebook.